<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>
<h3 class="subchapter">1</h3>
<p>
Then all these years they might have been going
sometimes to those lectures. Pater talking about
them—telling about old Rayleigh and old Kelvin as if they
were his intimates—flinging out remarks as if he wanted
to talk and his audience were incapable of appreciation
... light, heat, electricity, sound-waves; and <i>never</i> saying
that members could take friends or that there were
special lectures for children ... Sir Robert Ball ... “a
fascinating Irish fellow with the gift of the gab who made
a volcano an amusing reality” Krakatoa ... that year of
wonderful sunsets and afterglows ... the air half round
the world, full of fine dust ... it seemed cruel ... deprivation
... all those years; all that wonderful knowledge
just at hand. And now it was coming, the Royal
Institution ... this evening. She must find out whether
one had to dress and exactly how one got in. Albemarle
Street.... It all went on in <i>Albemarle</i> Street.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">2</h3>
<p>
“We might meet” said Mr. Hancock, busily washing
his hands and lifting them in the air to shake back his coat
sleeves. Miriam listened from her corner behind the
instrument cabinet, stupid with incredulity; he <i>could</i> not
be speaking of the lecture ... he must be ... he had
meant all the time that he was going to be with her at the
lecture.
</p>
<p>
“... in the library at half past eight.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh yes” she replied casually.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">3</h3>
<p>
To sit hearing the very best in the intellectual life of
London, the very best science there was; the inner circle
suddenly open ... the curious quiet happy laughter
that went through the world with the idea of the breaking
up of air and water and rays of light; the strange <i>love</i>
that came suddenly to them all in the object lesson classes
at Banbury Park. That was to begin again ... but now
not only books, not the strange heavenly difficult success
of showing the children the things that had been found
out; but the latest newest things from the men themselves—there
would be an audience and a happy man with
a lit face talking about things he had just found out. Even
if one did not understand there would be that. Fancy
Mr. Hancock being a member and always going and not
talking about it ... at lunch. He must know an enormous
number of things besides the wonders of dentistry and
pottery and Japanese art.
</p>
<p>
It was education ... a liberal education. It made up
for only being able to say one was secretary to a dentist
at a pound a week ... it sounded strange at the end of
twelve years of education and five months in Germany
and two teaching posts—to people who could not see how
wonderful it was from the inside; and the strange meaning
and rightness there was; there had been a meaning in
Mr. Hancock from the beginning, a sort of meaning in her
privilege of associating with fine rare people, so different
to herself and yet coming one after another, like questions
into her life, and staying until she understood ... somebody
struggled all night with the angel ... I will not let
thee go until thou bless me ... and there was some meaning—of
course, meanings everywhere ... perhaps a person
inside a life could always feel meanings ... or perhaps
only those who had moved from one experience to another
could get that curious feeling of a real self that stayed the
same through thing after thing.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">4</h3>
<p>
“This is the library” said Mr. Hancock leading Miriam
along from the landing at the top of the wide red-carpeted
staircase. It seemed a vast room—rooms leading one out
of the other, lit with soft red lights and giving a general
effect of redness, dull crimson velvet in a dull red glow and
people, standing in groups and walking about—a quite
new kind of people. Miriam glanced at her companion.
He looked in place; he was in his right place; these were
his people; people with gentle enlightened faces and keen
enlightened faces. They were all alike in some way. If
the room caught fire there would be no panic. They were
gentle, shyly gentle or pompously gentle, but all the same
and in agreement because they all knew everything, the real
important difficult things. Some of them were discussing
and disagreeing; many of the women’s faces had questions
and disagreements on them and they were nearly all worn
with thought; but they would disagree in a way that was
not quarrelsome, because everyone in the room was sure
of the importance of the things they were discussing ...
they were all a part of science.... “Science is always right
and the same, religion cannot touch it or be reconciled
with it, theories may modify or cancel each other but the
methods of science are one and unvarying. To question
that fundamental truth is irreligious” ... these people
were that in the type of their minds—one and unvarying;
always looking out at something with gentle intelligence
or keen intelligence ... this was Alma’s world ... it
would be something to talk to Alma about. There was
something they were not. They were not ... jolly. They
could not be. They would never stop “looking.” Culture
and refinement; with something about it that made them
quite different to the worldly people, a touch of rawness,
raw school harshness about them that was unconscious of
itself and could not come to life. Their shoulders and the
backs of their heads could never come to life. It gave them
a kind of deadness that was quite unlike the deadness of the
worldly people, not nearly so dreadful—rather funny and
likable. One could imagine them all washing, very carefully,
in an abstracted way still looking and thinking and
always with the advancement of science on their minds;
never really aware of anything behind or around them
because of the wonders of science. Seeing these people
changed science a little. They were almost something
tremendous; but not quite.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">5</h3>
<p>
“That’s old Huggins” murmured Mr. Hancock, giving
Miriam’s arm a gentle nudge as a white-haired old man
passed close by them with an old woman at his side, with
short white hair exactly like him. “The man who invented
spectrum analysis—and that’s his wife; they’re both great
fishermen.” Miriam gazed. <i>There</i>, was the splendid thing....
In her mind blazed the coloured bars of the spectrum.
In the room was the light of the beauty, the startling <i>life</i>
these two old people shed from every part of their persons.
The room blazed in the light they shed. She stood staring,
moving to watch their gentle living movements. They
moved as though the air through which they moved was a
living medium,—as though everything were alive all round
them—in a sort of hushed vitality. They were young.
She felt she had never seen anyone so young. She longed
to confront them just once, to stand for a moment the
tide in which they lived.
</p>
<p>
“<i>Ah</i> Meesturra Hancock—you <i>are</i> a faceful votary.”
</p>
<p>
That’s a German, thought Miriam, as the flattering deep
caressing gutturals rebounded dreadfully from her startled
consciousness. What a determined intrusion. How did
he come to know such a person? Glancing she met a pair
of swiftly calculating eyes fixed full on her face. There
was fuzzy black hair lifted back from an anxious, yellowish,
preoccupied little face. Under the face came the high
collar-band of a tightly-fitting dark claret-coloured ribbed
silk bodice, fastened from the neck to the end of the pointed
peak by a row of small round German buttons, closely
decorated with a gilded pattern. Mr. Hancock was smiling
an indulgent, deprecating smile. He made an introduction
and Miriam felt her hand tightly clasped and held by a
small compelling hand, while she sought for an answer to a
challenge as to her interest in science. “I don’t really
know anything about it” she said vaguely, strongly urged
to display her knowledge of German. The eyes were
removed from her face and the little lady boldly planted
and gazing about her made announcements to Mr. Hancock—about
the fascinating subject of the lecture and her hopes
of a large and appreciative audience.
</p>
<p>
What did she want? She could not possibly fail to see
that Mr. Hancock was telling her that he could see through
her social insincerities. It was dreadful to find that even
here there were social insincerities. She was like a busy
ambassador for things that belonged somewhere else and
that he was laughing at in an indulgent, deprecating way
that must make her blaze with an anger that she did not
show. Looking at her as her eyes and mouth made and
fired their busy sentences, Miriam suddenly felt that it
would be easy to deal with her, take her into a corner and
talk about German things, food and love affairs and poetry
and music. But she would always be breaking away to
make a determined intrusion on somebody she knew. She
could not really know any English person. What was she
doing, bearing herself so easily in the inner circle of English
science? Treating people as if she knew all about them
and they were all alike. How surprised she must often be,
and puzzled.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">6</h3>
<p>
“That was Miss Teresa Szigmondy” said Mr. Hancock,
reproducing his amused smile as they took their seats in the
dark theatre.
</p>
<p>
“Is she German?”
</p>
<p>
“Well ... I think, as a matter of fact, she’s part
Austro-Hungarian and part—well, <i>Hebrew</i>.” A Jewess ...
Miriam left her surroundings, pondering over a sudden
little thread of memory. An eager, very bright-eyed,
curiously dimpling school-girl face peering into hers, and
a whispering voice—“D’you know why we don’t go down
to prayers? ’Cos we’re <i>Jews</i>”—they had always been
late; fresh faced and shiny haired and untidy and late
and clever in a strange brisk way and talkative and easy
and popular with the teachers.... Their guttural voices
ringing out about the stairs and passages, deep and loud
and stronger than any of the voices of the other girls. The
Hyamson girls—they had been foreigners, like the Siggs
and the de Bevers, but different ... what was the difference
in a Jew? Mr. Hancock seemed to think it was a sort of
disgraceful joke ... what was it? Max Sonnenheim
had been a Jew, of course, the same voice. Banbury Park
“full of Jews” ... the Brooms said that in patient contemptuous
voices. But what <i>was</i> it? What did everybody
mean about them?
</p>
<p>
“Is she scientific?”
</p>
<p>
“She seems to be interested in science” smiled Mr.
Hancock.
</p>
<p>
“How funny of her to ask me to go to tea with her just
because you told her I knew German.”
</p>
<p>
“Well, you go; if you’re interested in seeing notabilities
you’ll meet all kinds of wonderful people at her house. She
knows everybody. She’s the niece of a great Hungarian
poet. I believe he’s to be seen there sometimes. They’re
all coming in now.” Mr. Hancock named the great names
of science one by one as the shyly gentle and the pompously
gentle little old men ambled and marched into the well
of the theatre and took their seats in a circle round the
central green table.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">7</h3>
<p>
“<i>There’s</i> a pretty lady” said Mr. Hancock, conversationally,
just as the light was lowered. Miriam glanced
across the half circle of faintly shining faces and saw an effect,
a smoothly coiffured head and smooth neck and shoulders
draped by a low deep circular flounce of lace rising from
the gloom of a dark dress, sweep in through a side door
bending and swaying—“or a pretty dress at any rate”—and
sat through the first minutes of the lecture, recalling
the bearing and manner of the figure, with sad fierce bitterness.
Mr. Hancock admired “feminine” women ...
or at any rate he was bored by her own heavy silence and
driven into random speech by the sudden dip and sweep
of the lace appearing in the light of the doorway. He was
surprised himself by his sudden speech and half corrected
it ... “or a pretty dress.” ... But anyhow he, even he,
was one of those men who do not know that an effect like
that was just an effect, a deliberate “charming” feminine
effect. But if he did not know that, did not know that it
was a trick and the whole advertising manner, the delicate,
plunging fall of the feet down the steps—“I am late;
look how nicely and quietly I am doing it; look at me
being late and apologetic and interested”—out of place
in the circumstances; then what was he doing here at all?
Did he <i>want</i> science or would he really rather be in a drawing
room with “pretty ladies” advertising effects and being
“arch” in a polite, dignified, lady-like manner? How
dingy and dull and unromantic and unfeminine he must
find her. She sat in a lively misery, following the whirling
circle of thoughts round and round, stabbed by their dull
thorns, and trying to drag her pain-darkened mind to meet
the claim of the platform, where, in a square of clear light,
a little figure stood talking eagerly and quietly in careful
slow English. Presently the voice on the platform won
her—clear and with its curious, even, unaccented rat-tat-tat
flowing and modulated with pure passion, the thrill of
truth and revelation running alive and life-giving through
every word. That, at least, she was sharing with her
companion ... “development-in-thee-method-of-intaircepting-thee-light.”
“Daguerre” ... a little Frenchman stopping
the sunlight, breaking it up, making it paint faces in filmy
black and white on a glass.... There would only be a
few women like the one with the frill in an audience like
this ... “women will talk shamelessly at a concert or an
opera, and chatter on a mountain top in the presence of a
magnificent panorama; their paganism is incurable.”
Then men mustn’t stare at them and treat them as works
of art. It was entirely the fault of men ... perfectly
reasonable that the women who got that sort of admiration
from men should assert themselves in the presence of other
works of art. The thing men called the noblest work of
God must be bigger than the work by a man. Men plumed
themselves and talked in a clever expert way about women
and never thought of their own share in the way those
women went on ... unfair, unfair; men were stupid
complacent idiots. But they were wonderful with their
brains. The life and air and fresh breath coming up from
the platform amongst the miseries and uncertainties lurking
in the audience was a man ... waves of light which would
rush through the film at an enormous speed and get away
into space without leaving any impression were stopped
by some special kind of film and went surging up and down
in confinement—making strata ... supairposeetion of
strata ... no Englishman could move his hands with that
smoothness, making you see. “Violet subchloride of silver.”
That would interest Mr. Hancock’s chemistry. She glanced
at the figure sitting very still, with bent head, at her side.
He was asleep. Her thoughts recoiled from the platform
and bent inwards, circling on their miseries. That was the
end, for him, of coming to a lecture, with her. If she had
been the frilled lady, sitting forward with her forward-falling
frill, patronising the lecture and “exhibiting” her
interest he would not have gone to sleep.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">8</h3>
<p>
When the colour photographs came, Miriam was too
happy for thought. Pictures of stained glass, hard crude
clear brilliant opaque flat colour, stood in miraculous
squares on the screen and pieces of gardens, grass and
flowers and trees shining with a shadeless blinding brilliance.
</p>
<p>
She made vague sounds. “It’s a wonderful achievement”
said Mr. Hancock, smiling with grave delighted
approval towards the screen. Miriam felt that he understood,
as her ignorance could not do, exactly what it all
meant scientifically; but there was something else in the
things as they stood, blinding, there that he did not see.
It was something that she had seen somewhere, often.
</p>
<p>
“They’ll never touch pictures.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh no—there’s no atmosphere; but there’s something
else; they’re exactly like something else....”
</p>
<p>
Mr. Hancock laughed, a little final crushing laugh that
turned away sceptical of further enlightenment.
</p>
<p>
Miriam sat silent, busily searching for something to
express the effect she felt. But she could not tell him what
she felt. There was something in this intense hard rich
colour like something one sometimes <i>saw</i> when it wasn’t
there, a sudden brightening and brightening of all colours
till you felt something must break if they grew any brighter—or
in the dark, or in one’s mind, suddenly, at any time,
unearthly brilliance. He would laugh and think one a little
insane; but it was the real certain thing; the one real
certain happy thing. And he would not have patience to
hear her try to explain; and by that he robbed her of
the power of trying to explain. He was not interested in
what she thought. Not interested. His own thoughts
were statements, things that had been agreed upon and
disputed and that people bandied about, competing with
each other to put them cleverly. They were not <i>things</i>.
It was only by pretending to be interested in these statements
and taking sides about them that she could have
conversation with him. He liked women who thought in
these statements. They always succeeded with men. They
had a reputation for wit. Did they really think and take an
interest in the things they said, or was it a trick, like
“clothes” and “manners”—or was it that women brought
up with brothers or living with husbands got into that way
of thinking and speaking. Perhaps there was something
in it. Something worth cultivating; a fine talent. But
it would mean hiding so much, letting so much go; all
the real things. The things men never seemed to know
about at all. Yet he loved beautiful things; and worried
about religion and had found comfort in “Literature and
Dogma” and wanted her to find comfort in it, assuming
her difficulties were the same as his own; and knowing
the dreadfulness of them. The brilliant unearthly pictures
remained in her mind, supporting her through the trial of
her consciousness of the stuffiness of her one long-worn
dress. Dresses should be fragrant in the evening. The
Newlands evening dress was too old fashioned. Things
had changed so utterly since last year. There was no money
to have it altered. But this was awful. Never again could
she go out in the evening, unless alone or with the girls.
That would be best, and happiest, really.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
