<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-20" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>
			<p class="subchapter">1</p>
			<p>Miriam turned swiftly in her chair and looked up. But Mr. Hancock was already at the door. There was only a glimpse of his unknown figure arrested for a moment with its back to her as he pulled the door wide enough to pass through. The door closed crisply behind him and his crisp unhastening footsteps went away out of hearing along the thickly carpeted hall.</p>
			<p>“<i>Dear</i> me!” she breathed through firmly held lips, standing up. Her blood was aflame. The thudding of her heart shook the words upon her breath. She was fighting against something more than amazement. She knew that only part of her refused to believe. In a part of her brain illumination leaving the shock already far away in the past, was at work undisturbed, flowing rapidly down into thoughts set neatly in the language of the world. She held them back, occupying herself irrelevantly about the room, catching back desperately at the familiar trains of revery suggested by its objects; cancelling the incident and summoning it again and again without prejudice or afterthought. Each time the shock recurred unchanged, firmly registered, its quality indubitable. She sat down at last to examine it and find her thoughts. Taking a pencil in a trembling hand she began carefully adding a long column of figures. A system of adding that had been recommended to her by the family mathematician now suggested itself for the first time in connection with her own efforts.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>How <i>dare</i> he?</p>
			<p>It was deliberate. A brusque casual tone, deliberately put on; a tone he sometimes used to the boys downstairs, or to cabmen. How did he dare to use it to her? It must cease instantly. It was not to be suffered for a moment. Not for a moment could she hold a position which would entitle any one, particularly any man to speak to her in that⁠—outrageous⁠—<i>official</i> tone. Why not? It was the way of business people and officials all the world over.⁠ ⁠… Then he should have begun as he meant to go on.⁠ ⁠… I won’t endure it now. No one has ever spoken to me in that way⁠—and no one shall, with impunity. I have been fortunate. They have spoiled me.⁠ ⁠… I should never have come if I had found they had that sort of tone. It was his difference that made me come.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">2</p>
			<p>Those two had talked to him and made him think. The aunt and cousins had prepared the way. But their hostility had been harmless. These two had approved. That was clear at the week-end. They must have chaffed him and given him their blessing. Then, for the first time, he had thought, sitting alone and pondering reasonably. It was he himself who had drawn back. He was quite right. He belonged to that side of society and must keep with them and go their way. Very wise and right⁠ ⁠… but damn his insolent complacency.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="tb"> </p>
			<p class="noindent">“Everything a professional man does, must stabilise his position.” Perhaps that is true. But then his business relationships must be business relationships from the first⁠ ⁠… that was expected. The wonder of the Wimpole Street life was that it had not been so. Instead of an employer there had been a sensitive isolated man; prosperous and strong outwardly and as suffering and perplexed in mind as any one could be. He had not hesitated to seek sympathy.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">3</p>
			<p><i>Any</i> fair-minded onlooker would condemn him. Anyone who could have seen the way he broke through resistance to social intercourse outside the practice. He may have thought he was being kind to a resourceless girl. It was <i>not</i> to resourcelessness that he had appealed. It was not that. That was not the truth.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">4</p>
			<p>He would have cynical thoughts. The truth was that something came in and happened of itself before one knew. A woman always knows first. It was not clear until Babington. But there was a sharp glimpse then. He must have known how amazed they would be at his cycling over after he had neglected them for years, on that one Sunday. They had concealed their amazement from him. But it was they who had revealed things. There was nothing imaginary after that in taking one wild glance and leaving things to go their way. Nothing. No one was to blame. And now he knew and had considered and had made an absurd reasonable decision and taken ridiculous prompt action.</p>
			<p class="tb"> </p>
			<p class="noindent">A business relationship⁠ ⁠… by <i>all</i> means. But he shall acknowledge and apologise. He shall explain his insulting admission of fear. He shall admit in plain speech what has accounted for his change of manner.</p>
			<p class="tb"> </p>
			<p class="noindent">Then that little horror is also condemned. <i>She</i> is not a wealthy efficient woman of the world.</p>
			<p class="tb"> </p>
			<p class="noindent">Men are simply paltry and silly⁠—all of them.</p>
			<p class="tb"> </p>
			<p class="noindent">In pain and fear she wandered about her room, listening for her bell. It had gone; the meaning of their days had gone; trust and confidence could never come back. A door was closed. His life was closed on her for ever.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="subchapter">5</p>
			<p>The bell rang softly in its usual way. The incident had been an accident; an illusion. Even so; she had been prepared for it, without knowing she was prepared, otherwise she would not have understood so fully and instantly. If she had only imagined it, it had changed everything, her interpretation of it was prophetic; just as before he had not known where they were so now the rupture was imminent whether he knew it or no. She found herself going upstairs breathing air thick with pain. This was dreadful.⁠ ⁠… She could not bear much of this.⁠ ⁠… The patient had gone. He would be alone. They would be alone. To be in his presence would be a relief⁠ ⁠… this was appalling. This pain could not be endured. The sight of the room holding the six months would be intolerable. She drew her face together, but her heart was beating noisily. The knob of the door handle rattled in her trembling hand⁠ ⁠… large flat brass knob with a row of grooves to help the grasp⁠ ⁠… she had never observed that before. The door opened before her. She flung it wider than usual and pushed her way, leaving it open⁠ ⁠… he was standing impermanently with a sham air of engrossment at his writing table and would turn on his heel and go the moment she was fairly across the room. Buoyant with pain she flitted through the empty air towards the distant bracket-table. Each object upon it stood marvellously clear. She reached it and got her hands upon the familiar instruments⁠ ⁠… no sound; he had not moved. The flame of the little spirit-lamp burned unwavering in the complete stillness⁠ ⁠… now was the moment to drop thoughts and anger. Up here was something that had been made up here, real and changeless and independent. The least vestige of tumult would destroy it. It was something that no one could touch; neither his friends nor he nor she. They had not made it and they could not touch it. Nothing had happened to it; and he had stood quietly there long enough for it to re-assert itself. Steadily with her hands full of instruments she turned towards the sterilising tray. The room was empty. Pain ran glowing up her arms from her burden of nauseating relics of the needs of some complacent patient⁠ ⁠… the room was stripped, a west-end surgery, among scores of other west-end surgeries, a prison claiming her by the bonds of the loathsome duties she had learned.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
