<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
			<p class="subchapter">1</p>
			<p>There was a strong soft grey light standing at the side of the blind⁠ ⁠… smiling and touching her as it had promised. She leaped to the floor and stood looking at it swaying with sleep. Ships sailing along with masts growing on them, poplars streaming up from the ships, all in a steam of gold.⁠ ⁠… Last night’s soapy water poured away and the fresh poured out ready standing there all night, everything ready.⁠ ⁠… I must not forget the extra piece of string.⁠ ⁠… Je-ru-sa-<i>lem</i> the Gol-den, with-milk-and-hun-ney⁠—blest.⁠ ⁠… Sh, not so much noise⁠ ⁠… beneath thy con, tem, pla, tion, sink, heart, and, voice, o, ppressed.</p>
			<div class="poem-container">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<p class="verse">I <i>know</i> not, oh, I, <i>know</i>, not.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="noindent">Sh⁠—Sh⁠ ⁠… hark hark my soul angelic songs are swelling O’er earth’s green fields, and ocean’s wave-beat shore⁠ ⁠… damn⁠—blast where are my bally knickers? sing us sweet fragments of the songs above.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p class="noindent">The green world everywhere, inside and out⁠ ⁠… all along the dim staircase, waiting in the dim cold kitchen.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p class="noindent">No blind, brighter. Cool grey light, a misty windless morning. Shut the door.</p>
			<div class="poem-container">
				<div class="poem">
					<div class="stanza">
						<p class="verse">
							<i>They</i>
							<strong>stand</strong>
							<i>those</i>
							<strong>halls</strong>
							<i>of</i>
							<strong>zi-on</strong>
						</p>
						<p class="verse"><strong>All jubilant</strong> <i>with</i> <strong>song</strong>.</p>
					</div>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p class="subchapter">2</p>
			<p>As she neared Colnbrook the road grew heavier and a closer mist lay over the fields. It was too soon for fatigue but her knees already seemed heavy with effort. Getting off at the level crossing she found that her skirt was sodden and her zouave spangled all over with beads of moisture. She walked shivering across the rails and remounted rapidly, hoisting into the saddle a draggled person that was not her own and riding doggedly on beating back all thoughts but the thought of sunrise.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">3</p>
			<p>“Is this Reading?”</p>
			<p>The cyclist smiled as he shouted back. He knew she knew. But he liked shouting too. If she had yelled Have you got a <i>soul</i>, it would have been just the same. If everyone were on bicycles all the time you could talk to everybody, all the time, about anything⁠ ⁠… sailing so steadily along with two free legs⁠ ⁠… how much easier it must be with your knees going so slowly up and down⁠ ⁠… how <i>funny</i> I must look with my knees racing up and down in lumps of skirt. But I’m here, at the midday rest. It must be nearly twelve.</p>
			<p>Drawing into the curb near a confectioner’s she thought of buying two bars of plain chocolate. There <i>was</i> some sort of truth in the Swiss Family Robinson. If you went on, it was all right. There was only death. People frightened you about things that were not there. I will never listen to anybody again; or be frightened. That cyclist knew, as long as he was on his bicycle. Perhaps he has people who make him not himself. He can always get away again. Men can always get away. I am going to lead a man’s life always getting away.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>Wheeling her machine back to the open road she sat down on a bank and ate the cold sausage and bread and half of the chocolate and lay down to rest on a level stretch of grass in front of a gate. Light throbbed round the edges of the little high white fleecy clouds. She swung triumphantly up. The earth throbbed beneath her with the throbbing of her heart⁠ ⁠… the sky steadied and stood further off, clear peaceful blue with light neat soft bunches of cloud drifting slowly across it. She closed her eyes upon the dazzling growing distances of blue and white and felt the horizon folding down in a firm clear sweep round her green cradle. Within her eyelids fields swung past green, cornfields gold and black, fields with coned clumps of harvested corn, dusty gold, and black, on either side of the bone-white grass trimmed road. The road ran on and on lined by low hedges and the strange everlasting back-flowing fields. Thrilling hedges and outstretched fields of distant light, coming on mile after mile, winding off, left behind⁠ ⁠… “it’s the Bath Road I shall be riding on; I’m going down to Chiswick to see which way the wind is on the Bath Road.⁠ ⁠…” Trees appeared golden and green and shadowy with warm cool strong shaded trunks coming nearer and larger. They swept by, their shadowy heads sweeping the lower sky. Poplars shot up drawing her eyes to run up their feathered slimness and sweep to the top of the pointed plumes piercing the sky. Trees clumped in masses round houses leading to villages that shut her into little corridors of hard hot light⁠ ⁠… the little bright sienna form of the hen she had nearly run over; the land stretching serenely out again, rolling along, rolling along in the hot sunshine with the morning and evening freshness at either end⁠ ⁠… sweeping it slowly in and out of the deeps of the country night⁠ ⁠… eyelids were transparent. It was <i>light</i> coming through one’s eyelids that made that clear soft buff; soft buff light filtering through one’s body⁠ ⁠… little sounds, insects creeping and humming in the hedge, sounds from the grass. Sudden single quiet sounds going up from distant fields and farms, lost in the sky.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">4</p>
			<p>I’ve got my sea-legs⁠ ⁠… this is <i>riding</i>⁠—not just straining along trying to forget the wobbly bicycle, but feeling it wobble and being able to control it⁠ ⁠… being able to look about easily⁠ ⁠… there will be a harvest moon this month, rolling up huge and hot, suddenly over the edge of a field; the last moon. I shall see that anyhow whatever the holiday is like. It will be cold again in the winter. Perhaps I shan’t feel so cold this winter.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">5</p>
			<p>She recognised the figure the instant she saw it. It was as if she had been riding the whole day to meet it. Completely forgotten it had been all the time at the edge of the zest of her ride. It had been everywhere all the time and there it was at last dim and distant and unmistakable⁠ ⁠… coming horribly along, a murk in the long empty road. She slowed up looking furtively about. The road had been empty for so long. It stretched invisibly away behind, empty. There was no sound of anything coming along; nothing but the squeak squeak of her gear-case; bitter empty fields on either side, greying away to the twilight, the hedges sharp and dark, enemies; nothing ahead but the bare road, carrying the murky figure; there all the time; and bound to come. She rode on at her usual pace struggling for an absorption so complete as to make her invisible, but was held back by her hatred of herself for having wondered whether he had seen her. The figure was growing more distinct. Murky. Murk from head to foot. Wearing openly like a coat the expression that could be seen hidden inside everybody. She had made an enemy of him. It was too late. The voice in her declaring sympathy, claiming kinship faded faint and far away within her⁠ ⁠… hullo old boy, isn’t it a bloody world⁠ ⁠… he would know it had come too late. He came walking along, slowly walking like someone in a procession or a quickly moving funeral; like someone in a procession, who must go on. He was surrounded by people, pressed in and down by them, wanting to kill everyone with a look and run, madly, to root up trees and tear down the landscape and get outside⁠ ⁠… he is myself.⁠ ⁠… He stood still. Her staring eyes made him so clear that she saw his arrested face just before he threw out an arm and came on, stumbling. Measuring the width of the roadway she rode on slowly along the middle of it, pressing steadily and thoughtlessly forward, her eyes fixed on the far-off spaces of the world she used to know, towards a barrier of swirling twilight. He was quite near, slouching and thinking and silently talking, on and on. He was all right poor thing. She put forth all her strength and shot past him in a sharp curve, her eye just seeing that he turned and stood, swaying.</p>
			<p>What a blessing he was drunk what a blessing he was drunk she chattered busily, trying to ignore her trembling limbs. Again and again as she steadied and rode sturdily and blissfully on came the picture of herself saying with confidential eagerness as she dismounted “I <i>say</i>⁠—make haste⁠—there’s a madman coming down the road⁠—get behind the hedge till he’s gone⁠—I’m going for the police.” A man would not have been afraid. Then men <i>are</i> more independent than women. Women can never go very far from the protection of men⁠—because they are physically inferior. But men are afraid of mad bulls.⁠ ⁠… They have to resort to tricks. What was that I was just thinking? Something I ought to remember. Women have to be protected. But men explain it the wrong way. It was the same thing.⁠ ⁠… The polite protective man was the same; if he relied on his strength. The world is the most sickening hash.⁠ ⁠… I’m so sorry for you. I hate humanity too. <i>Isn’t</i> it a lovely day? <i>Isn’t</i> it? Just look.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">6</p>
			<p>The dim road led on into the darkness of what appeared to be a private estate. The light from the lamp fell upon wide gates fastened back. The road glimmered on ahead with dense darkness on either side. There had been no turning. The road evidently passed through the estate. She rode on and on between the two darknesses, her light casting a wobbling radiance along her path. Rustling sounded close at hand, and quick thuddings startled her making her heart leap. The hooting of an owl echoed through the hollows amongst the trees. Stronger than fear was the comfort of the dense darkness. Her own darkness by right of riding through the day. Leaning upon the velvety blackness she pushed on, her eyes upon the little circle of light, steady on the centre of the pathway, wobbling upon the feet of the trees emerging in slow procession on either side of the way.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">7</p>
			<p>The road began to slope gently downwards. Wearily back-pedalling she crept down the incline her hand on the brake, her eyes straining forward. Hard points of gold light⁠—of course. She had put them there herself. Marlborough⁠ ⁠… the prim polite lights of Marlborough; little gliding moving lights, welcoming, coming safely up as she descended. They disappeared. There must have been a gap in the trees. Presently she would be down among them.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">8</p>
			<p>“<i>Goode</i> Lord⁠—it’s a woman.”</p>
			<p>She passed through the open gate into the glimmer of a descending road. Yes. Why not? Why that amazed stupefaction? Trying to rob her of the darkness and the wonderful coming out into the light. The man’s voice went on with her down the dull safe road. A young lady, taking a bicycle ride in a daylit suburb. That was what she was. That was all he would allow. It’s something in men.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">9</p>
			<p>“You don’t think of riding up over the downs at this time of night?” It was like an At home. Everybody in the shop was in it, but she was not in it. Marlborough thoughts rattling in all the heads; with Sunday coming. They had sick and dying relations. But it was all in Marlborough. Marlborough was all round them all the time, the daily look of it, the morning coming each day excitingly, all the people seeing each other again and the day going on. They did not know that that was it; or what it was they liked. Talking and thinking with the secret hidden all the time even from themselves. But it was that that made them talk and make such a to do about everything. They had to hide it because if they knew they would <i>feel</i> fat and complacent and wicked. They were fat and complacent because they did not know it.</p>
			<p>“Oh yes I do,” said Miriam in feeble husky tones.</p>
			<p>She stood squarely in front of the grating. The people became angry gliding forms; cheated; angry in an eternal resentful silence; pretending. The man began thoughtfully ticking off the words.</p>
			<p>“How far have you come,” he said suddenly pausing and looking up through the grating.</p>
			<p>“From London.”</p>
			<p>“Then you’ve just come down through the Forest.”</p>
			<p>“Is that a forest?”</p>
			<p>“You must have come through Savernake.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t know it was a forest.”</p>
			<p>“Well I don’t advise you to go on up over the downs at this time of night.”</p>
			<p>If only she had not come in she could have gone on without knowing it was “the downs.”</p>
			<p>“My front tyre is punctured,” she said conversationally, leaning a little against the counter.</p>
			<p>The man’s face tightened. “There’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Drake next door would mend that for you in the morning.”</p>
			<p>“Next door. Oh, thank you.” Pushing her sixpence under the rail she went down the shop to the door seeing nothing but the brown dusty floor leading out to the helpless night.</p>
			<p>Why did he keep making such impossible suggestions? The tyre was absolutely flat. How much would a hotel cost? How did you stay in hotels⁠ ⁠… hotels⁠ ⁠… her hands went busily to her wallet. She drew out the repair outfit and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Leyton’s voice sounded, emphatic and argumentative “You know where you are and they don’t rook you.” There was certain to be one in a big town like this. She swished back into the shop and interrupted the man with her eager singing question.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” came the answer, “there’s a quiet place of that sort up the road, right up against the Forest.”</p>
			<p>“Has my telegram gone? Can I alter it?”</p>
			<p>“No, it’s not gone, you’re just in time.”</p>
			<p>It was the loveliest thing that could have happened. The day was complete, from morning to night.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">10</p>
			<p>Someone brought in the meal and clattered it quietly down, going away and shutting the door without a word. A door opened and the sound of departing footsteps ceased. She was shut in with the meal and the lamp in the little crowded world. The musty silence was so complete that the window hidden behind the buff and white blinds and curtains must be shut. The silence throbbed. The throbbing of her heart shook the room. Something was telling the room that she was the happiest thing in existence. She stood up, the beloved little room moving as she moved, and gathered her hands gently against her breast, to⁠ ⁠… get through, through into the soul of the musty little room.⁠ ⁠… “Oh.⁠ ⁠…” She felt herself beating from head to foot with a radiance, but her body within it was weak and heavy with fever. The little scene rocked, crowding furniture, antimacassars, ornaments, wool mats. She looked from thing to thing with a beaming, feverish, frozen smile. Her eyes blinked wearily at the hot crimson flush of the mat under the lamp. She sank back again her heavy light limbs glowing with fever. “By Jove, I’m tired.⁠ ⁠… I’ve had nothing since breakfast m⁠—but a m-bath bun and an acidulatudd <i>drop</i>.”⁠ ⁠… She laughed and sat whistling softly⁠ ⁠… Jehoshophat⁠—Manchester⁠—Mesopotamia⁠—beloved⁠—you sweet sweet thing⁠—Veilchen, unter Gras versteckt⁠—out of it all⁠—here I am. I shall always stay in hotels.⁠ ⁠… Glancing towards the food spread out on a white cloth near the globed lamp she saw beyond the table a little stack of books. Ham and tea and bread and butter.⁠ ⁠… Leaning unsteadily across the table⁠ ⁠… battered and ribbed green binding and then a short moral story or natural history⁠—blue, large and fat, a “story-book” of some kind⁠ ⁠… she drew out one of the undermost volumes.⁠ ⁠… <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Robert Elsmere</i>! Here, after all these years in this little outlandish place. She poured out some tea and hurriedly slid a slice of ham between two pieces of bread and butter and sat back with the food drawn near, the lamplight glaring into her eyes, the printed page in exciting shadow. Everything in the room was distinct and sharp⁠—morning strength descended upon her.</p>
			<p class="subchapter">11</p>
			<p>How he must have liked and admired. It must have amazed him; a woman setting forth and putting straight the muddles of his own mind. “Powerful,” he probably said. It was a half jealous keeping to himself of a fine, good thing. If he could have known that it would have been, just at that very moment, the answer to my worry about Christ he would have been jealous and angry quite as much as surprised and pleased and sympathetic⁠ ⁠… he was afraid <i>himself</i> of the idea that anyone can give up the idea of the divinity of Christ and still remain religious and good. He ought to have let me read it.⁠ ⁠… If he could have stated it himself as well, that day by the gate he would have done so⁠ ⁠… “a very reasonable dilemma my dear.” He knew I was thinking about things. But he had not read Robert Elsmere then. He was jealous of a thunderbolt flung by a woman.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p class="subchapter">12</p>
			<p>And now I’ve got beyond <i>Robert Elsmere</i>.⁠ ⁠… That’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Humphry Ward and Robert Elsmere; that’s gone. There’s no answering science. One must choose. Either science or religion. They can’t both be true. This is the same as Literature and Dogma.⁠ ⁠… Only in Literature and Dogma there is that thing that is perfectly true⁠—that thing⁠—what is it? What was that idea in Literature and Dogma?</p>
			<p class="subchapter">13</p>
			<p>I wonder if I’ve strained my heart. This funny feeling of sinking through the bed. Never mind. I’ve done the ride. I’m alive and alone in a strange place. Everything’s alive all round me in a new way. Nearer. As the flame of the candle had swelled and gone out under her blowing she had noticed the bareness of everything in the room⁠—a room for chance travellers, nothing that anyone could carry away. She could still see it as it was when she moved and blew out the candle, a whole room swaying sideways into darkness. The more she relinquished the idea of harm and danger, the nearer and more intimate the room became.⁠ ⁠… No one can prevent my being alone in a strange place, near to things and loving them. It’s more than worth half killing yourself. It makes you ready to die. I’m not going to die, even if I have strained my heart. “Damaged myself for life.” I am going to sleep. The dawn will come, no one knowing where I am. Because I have no money I must go on and stay with these people. But I have been alive here. There’s hardly any time. I <i>must</i> go to sleep.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
