<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
			<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter">
<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>
<h3 class="subchapter">1</h3>
<p>
Miriam sat on a damp wooden seat at the station.
Shivering with exhaustion, she looked across at the
early morning distance, misty black and faint misty green....
Something had happened to it. It was not beautiful;
or anything. It was not anything.... That was the
punishment.... The landscape was dead. All that had
come to an end. Her nimble lifeless mind noted the fact.
There was dismay in it. Staring at the landscape she felt
the lifelessness of her face; as if something had brushed
across it and swept the life away, leaving her only sight.
She could never feel any more.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
Behind her fixed eyes something new seemed moving
forward with a strange indifference. Suddenly the landscape
unrolled. The rim of the horizon was no longer
the edge of the world. She lost sight of it in the rolling
out of the landscape in her mind, out and out, in a
light easy stretch, showing towns and open country and
towns again, seas and continents on and on; empty and
still. <i>No</i>thing. Everywhere in the world nothing. She
drifted back to herself and clung, bracing herself. She was
somebody. If she was somebody who was going to do something
... not roll trolleys along a platform. The train
swept busily into the landscape; the black engine, the
brown, white-panelled carriages, warm and alive in the
empty landscape. Her strained nerves relaxed. In a
moment she would be inside it, being carried back into her
own world. She felt eagerly forward towards it. Hearts-ease
was there. She would be able to breathe again. But
not in the same way; unless she could forget. There were
other eyes looking at it. They were inside her; not caring
for the things she had cared for, dragging her away from
them.
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
They are not my sort of people. Alma does not
care for me personally. Little cries and excitement and
affection. She wants to; but she does not care for anyone
personally. Neither of them do. They live in a world....
“Michael Angelo” and “Stevenson” and “Hardy”
and “Dürer” and that other man, ... Alma ...
popping and sweeping gracefully about with little cries
and clever sayings and laughter, trying to be real; in a
bright outside way, showing all the inside things because
she kept crushing them down. It was so tiring that one
could not like being with her. She seemed to be carrying
something off all the time; and to be as if she were afraid
if the talk stopped for a moment, it would be revealed.
</p>
<p>
In the teashop with Alma alone it had been different;
all the old school-days coming back as she sat there. Her
eager story. It was impossible to do anything but hold
her hands and admire her bravery and say you did not care.
But it was not quite real; it was too excited and it was
wrong, certainly wrong, to go down not really caring. I
need not go down again.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">2</h3>
<p>
Cold and torpid she got up and stepped into an empty
carriage. Both windows were shut and the dry stuffy air
seemed almost warm after her exposure. She let one down
a little; sheltered from the damp the little stream of outside
air was welcome and refreshing. She breathed deeply,
safe, shut in and moving on. With an unnecessarily vigorous
swing of her arms she hoisted her pilgrim basket on to the
rack. Of <i>course</i>, she murmured smiling, of <i>course</i> I shall
go down again ... <i>rather</i>.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">3</h3>
<p>
That extraordinary ending of fear of the great man at
the station. Alma and the little fair square man not much
taller than herself looking like a grocer’s assistant with a
curious kind confidential ... unprejudiced eye ... they
had come, both of them, out of their house to the station
to meet her ... “this is Hypo” and the quiet shy walk
to the house he asking questions by saying them—statements.
You caught the elusive three-fifteen. This is
your bag. We can carry it off without waiting for the ...
British porter. You’ve done your journey brilliantly. We
haven’t far to walk.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">4</h3>
<p>
The strange shock of the bedroom, the strange new thing
springing out from it ... the clear soft bright tones, the
bright white light streaming through the clear muslin, the
freshness of the walls ... the flattened dumpy shapes of
dark green bedroom crockery gleaming in a corner; the
little green bowl standing in the middle of the white spread
of the dressing table cover ... wild violets with green
leaves and tendrils put there by somebody with each leaf
and blossom standing separate ... touching your heart;
joy, looking from the speaking pale mauve little flowers to
the curved rim of the green bowl and away to the green
crockery in the corner; again and again the fresh shock
of the violets ... the little cold change in the room after
the books, strange fresh bindings and fascinating odd shapes
and sizes, gave out their names ... The White Boat—Praxiter—King
Chance—Mrs. Prendergast’s Palings ...
the promise of them in their tilted wooden case by the bedside
table from every part of the room, their unchanged
names, the chill of the strange sentences inside—like a sort
of code written for people who understood, written at
something, clever raised voices in a cold world. In Mrs.
Prendergast’s Palings there were cockney conversations spelt
as they were spoken. None of the books were about ordinary
people ... three men, seamen, alone, getting swamped in a
boat in shallow water in sight of land ... a man and a
girl he had no right to be with wandering on the sands,
the cold wash and sob of the sea; her sudden cold salt
tears; the warmth of her shuddering body. Praxiter
beginning without telling you anything, about the thoughts
of an irritating contemptuous superior man, talking at the
expense of everybody. Nothing in any of them about
anything one knew or felt; casting you off ... giving a
chill ache to the room. To sit ... alone, reading in the
white light, amongst the fresh colours—but not these books.
To go downstairs was a sacrifice: coming back there
would be the lighting of the copper candlestick, twisting
beautifully up from its stout stem. What made it different
to ordinary candlesticks? <i>What?</i> It was like ... a gesture.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">5</h3>
<p>
“You knew Susan at school.” The brown, tweed-covered
arm of the little square figure handed a tea-cup.
The high huskily hooting voice ... what was the overwhelming
impression? A common voice, with a cockney
twang. Overwhelming. “What was Susan like at school?”
The voice was saying two things; that was it; doing
something deliberately; it was shy and determined and
deliberate and expectant. Miriam glanced incredulously,
summoning all her forces against her sense of strange direct
attack, pushing through and out to some unknown place,
dreading her first words, not taking in a further remark
of the live voice. She could get up and go away for ever;
or speak and whatever she spoke would keep her there
for ever. Alma, sitting behind the tea-tray in a green Alma
dress with small muslin cuffs and collars had betrayed her
into this. Alma had been got by this and had brought her
to the test of it. The brown walls, brown paper all over,
like parcel paper and Japanese prints; nothing else, high-backed
curious shaped wooden chairs all with gestures, like
the candlestick, and the voice that was in the same difficult,
different world as the books upstairs.... Alma had betrayed
her, talking as if they were like other people and not
saying anything about this strange cold difference. Alma
had come to it and was playing some part she had taken
up ... there was some wrong hurried rush somewhere
within the beautiful room. Stop, she wanted to say, you’re
all wrong. You’ve dropped something you don’t know
anything about deliberately. Alma ought to have told
you. Hasn’t she told you?
</p>
<p>
“Alma hasn’t changed” she said, desperately questioning
the smooth soft movements of the smooth soft hands, the
quiet controlled pose of the head. Alma had the same
birdlike wide blink and flash of her limpid brown eyes, the
same tight crinkle and snicker when she laughed, the same
way of saying nothing or only the clever superficially true
things men said. Alma had agreed with this man and had
told him nothing or only things in the clever way he would
admire.
</p>
<p>
He made little sounds into his handkerchief. He was
nonplussed at a dull answer. It would be necessary to be
brilliant and amusing to hold his attention—in fact to tell
lies. To get on here one would have to say clever things
in a high bright voice.
</p>
<p>
The little man began making statements about Alma.
Sitting back in his high-backed chair with his head bent
and his small fine hands clasping his large handkerchief he
made little short statements, each improving on the one
before it and coming out of it, and little subdued snortings
at the back of his nose in the pauses between his sentences
as if he were afraid of being answered or interrupted before
he developed the next thing. Alma accompanied his discourse
with increasing snickerings. Miriam after eagerly
watching the curious mouthing half hidden by the drooping
straggle of moustache and the strange concentrated
gleam of the grey blue eyes staring into space, laughed
outright. But how could he speak so of her? He met the
laughter with a minatory outstretched forefinger, and raised
his voice to a soft squeal ending as he launched with a little
throw of the hand his final jest, in a rotund crackle of high
hysterical open-mouthed laughter. The door opened and
two tall people were shown in; a woman with a narrow
figure and a long dark-curtained sallow horse-like face,
dressed in a black striped cream serge coat and skirt and a
fair florid troubled fickle smiling man in a Norfolk tweed
and pale blue tie. “Hullo” said the little man propelling
himself out of his chair with a neat swift gesture and standing
small and square in the room making cordial sounds and
moving his arms about as if to introduce and seat his guests
without words and formalities. Alma’s thin excited hubbub
and the clearly enunciated, obviously prepared facetiousnesses
of the newcomers—his large and tenor and florid
... a less clever man than Mr. Wilson ... and hers bass
and crisp and contemptuous ... nothing was hidden from
her; she would <i>like</i> the queer odd people who went about
at Tansley Street—was broken into by the entry of three
small young men, all three dark and a little grubby and
shabby looking. The foremost stood with vivid eager eyes
wide open as if he had been suddenly checked in the midst
of imparting an important piece of news. Alma came
forward to where they stood herded and silent just inside
the door and made little faint encouraging maternal sounds
at them as she shook hands.
</p>
<p>
As she did this Miriam figured them in a flash coming
down the road to the house; their young men’s talk and
arguments, their certainty of rightness and completeness,
their sudden embarrassment and secret anger with their
precipitate rescuer. Mr. Wilson was on his feet again, not
looking at them nor breaking up the circle already made,
but again making his sociable sounds and circular movements
with his arms as if to introduce and distribute them
about the room. The husband and wife kept on a dialogue
in strained social voices as if they were bent on showing
that their performance was not dependant on an audience.
Miriam averted her eyes from them, overcome by painful
visions of the two at breakfast or going home after social
occasions. The three young men retreated to the window
alcove behind the tea-table one of them becoming Miriam’s
neighbour as she sat in the corner near the piano whither
she had fled from the centre of the room when the husband
and wife came in.
</p>
<p>
It was the young man with the important piece of news.
He sat bent forward holding his cup and plate with outstretched
arms. His headlong expression remained unchanged.
Wisps of black hair stood eagerly out from his
head and a heavy thatch fell nearly to his eyebrows. “Did
anybody see anything of Mrs. Binks at the station?” asked
Alma from her table. “Oh my dear” she squealed gently
as the maid ushered in a little lady in a straight dress of red
flannel frilled with black chiffon at the neck and wrists,
“we were all afraid you weren’t coming.” “Don’t anybody
move”—the deep reedy voice reverberated amongst
the standing figures; the firm compact undulating figure
came across the room to Alma. Its light-footed swiftness
and easy certainty filled Miriam with envy. The envy
evaporated during the embracing of Alma and the general
handshaking. The low strong reedy voice went on saying
things out into the silence of the room in a steady complete
way. There was something behind it all that did not show,
or showed in the brilliant ease, something that Miriam did
not envy. She tried to discover what it was as the room
settled, leaving Mrs. Binkley on a low chair near to Alma,
taking tea and going on with her monologue, each of her
pauses punctuated by soft appreciative sounds from Alma
and little sounds from Mr. Wilson. She was popular with
them. Mr. Wilson sat surveying her. Did they know how
hard she was working? Perhaps they did and admired
or even envied it. But what was it for? Surely she must
feel the opposition in the room? Alma and Mr. Wilson
approved and encouraged her exhibition. She was in their
curious league for keeping going high-voiced clever sayings.
So had the husband appeared to be at first. Now he sat
silent with a kind polite expression about his head and figure.
But his mouth was uneasy, he was afraid of something or
somebody and was staring at Mrs. Binkley. The wife sat
in a gloomy abstraction smoking a large cigarette ...
she was something like Mrs. Kronen in her way; only
instead of belonging to South Africa she had been a hard
featured English school-girl; she was still a hard-featured
English school-girl, with the oldest eyes Miriam had ever
seen.
</p>
<p>
“Why not write an article about a lamp-post?” said
one of the young men suddenly in a gruff voice in answer
to a gradually growing murmur of communications from
one of his companions. Miriam breathed easier air. The
shameful irritating tension was over. It was as if fresh
wonderful life-giving things that were hovering in the
room, driven back into corners, pressing up and away
against the angles of the ceiling and about the window-door
behind the young men and against the far-away door
of the room, came back, flooding all the spaces of the room.
Mr. Wilson moved in his chair, using his handkerchief
towards the young men with an eye on the speaker. “Or
a whole book” murmured the young man farthest from
Miriam in an eager cockney voice. The two young men
were speaking towards Mr. Wilson, obviously trying to draw
him in, bringing along one of his topics; something that
had been discussed here before. There would be talk,
men’s talk, argument and showing off; but there would
be something alive in the room. In the conflict there would
be ideas, wrong ideas, men taking sides, both right and both
wrong; men showing off; but wanting with all their
wrongness to get at something. Perhaps somebody would
say something. She regretted her shy refusal of a cigarette
from Mr. Wilson’s large full box. It stood open now by
the side of the tea-tray. He would not offer it again.
Cigarettes and talk.... What would Mr. Hancock think?
“People do not meet together for conversation, nowadays.” ...
There was going to be conversation, literary
conversation and she was going to hear it ... be in it.
Clever literary people trying to say things well; of course
they were all literary; they were all the same set, knowing
each other, all calling Mr. Wilson “Hypo”; talk about
books was the usual Saturday afternoon thing here; and
she was in it and would be able to be in it again, any week.
It was miraculous. All these people were special people,
emancipated people. Probably they all wrote, except the
women. There were too many women. Somehow or other
she must get a cigarette. Life, suddenly full of new things
made her bold. Presently, when the conversation was
general she would beg one of the young man at her side.
Mr. Wilson would not turn to her again. She had failed
twice already in relation to him; but after her lame
refusal of the cigarette which he had accepted instantly
and sat down with, he had glanced sharply at her in a
curious personal way, noticing the little flat square of white
collarette—the knot of violets upon it, the long-sleeved
black nun’s-veiling blouse, the long skirt of her old silkette
evening dress. These items had made her sick with anxiety
in their separate poverty as she put them on for the visit;
but his eyes seemed to draw them all together. Perhaps
there in the dark corner they made a sort of whole. She
rejoiced gratefully in the memory of Mag’s factory girl,
in her own idea of having the sleeves gauged at the wrists
in defiance of fashion, to make frills extending so as partly
to cover her large hands; over the suddenly realised possibility
of wearing the silkette skirt as a day skirt. She must
remain in the corner, not moving, all the afternoon. If
she moved in the room the bright light would show the
scrappiness of her clothes. In the evening it would be all
right. She sat back in her corner, happy, and forgetful.
She had not had so much tea as she wanted. She had
refused the cigarette against her will. Now she was alive.
These weak things would not happen again, and next time
she would bring her own cigarettes. To take out a cigarette
and light it here, at home amongst her own people. These
were her people. There was something here in the exciting
air that she did not understand; something that was going
to tax her more than she had ever been taxed before. She
had found her way to it through her wanderings; it had
come; it was her due. It corresponded to something in
herself, shapeless and inexpressible; but there. She knew
it by herself, sitting in her corner; her own people would
know it, if they could see her here; but no one here would
find it out. Every one here was doing something; or the
wife of somebody who did something. They were like a
sort of secret society ... all agreed about something ...
about what? <i>What</i> was it Mr. Wilson was so sure about?...
They would despise everybody who was living an ordinary
life, or earning a living in anything but something to do
with books. Seeing her there they would take for granted
that she too, was somebody ... and she was somehow,
within herself somewhere; although she had made herself
into a dentist’s secretary. She was better qualified to
be here and to understand the strange secret here, in the
end, than anyone else she knew. But it was a false position,
unless they all knew what she was. If she could say clever
things they would like her; but she would be like Alma
and Mrs. Binkley; pretending; and without any man
to point to as giving her the right to be about here. It was
a false position. It was as if she were there as a candidate
to become an Alma or a Mrs. Binkley; imitating the
clever sayings of men, or flattering them.
</p>
<p>
“<i>Do</i> it Gowry,” said Mr. Wilson ... “a book” ...
he made his little sound behind his nose as he felt for the
phrases that were to come after his next words ... “a—er—book;
about a lamp-post. You see” he held up
his minatory finger to keep off an onslaught and quench
an eager monologue that began pouring from Miriam’s
nearest neighbour, and went on in his high weak husky
voice. The young men were quiet. For a few moments
the red lady and Alma made bright conversation as if
nothing were happening; but with a curious hard emptiness
in their voices, like people rehearsing and secretly angry
with each other. Then they were silent, sitting posed and
attentive, with uneasy intelligent smiling faces; their
costumes and carefully arranged hair useless on their hands.
Mrs. Binkley did not suffer so much as Alma; her corsetless
eager crouch gave her the appearance of intentness,
her hair waved naturally, had tendrils and could be left
to look after itself; her fresh easy strength was ready for
the next opportunity. It was only something behind her
face that belied her happy pose. Alma was waiting in some
curious fixed singleness of tension; her responses hovered
fixed about her mouth, waiting for expression, she sat fixed
in a frozen suspension of deliberate amiability and approval,
approval of a certain chosen set of things; approval which
excluded everything else with derision ... it was Alma’s
old derision, fixed and arranged in some way by Mr. Wilson.
</p>
<p>
“There will be books—with all that cut out—him and
her—all that sort of thing. The books of the future will
be clear of all that.”
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">6</h3>
<p>
Miriam sat so enclosed in her unarmed struggle with the
new definition of a book that the entry of the newcomers
left her unembarrassed. Two rotund ruddy men in mud-spotted
tweeds, both fair, one with a tuft like a cockatoo
standing straight up from his forehead above a smooth
pink face, the other older than anybody in the room, with
a shaggy head and a small pointed beard. They came
in talking aloud and stumped about the room, making
their greetings. Miriam bowed twice and twice received
a sturdy handclasp and the kindly gleam of blue eyes, one
pair large, mild and owl-like behind glasses; the other
fierce and glinting, a shaft of whimsical blue light. The
second pair of eyes surely would not agree with what Mr.
Wilson had been saying. But their coming in had broken
a charm; the overwhelming charm of the way he put
things; so that even while you hated what he was saying
and his way of stating things as if they were the final gospel
and no one else in the world knew anything at all, you wanted
him to go on; only to go on and to keep on going on. It
was wrong somehow; he was all wrong; “though I speak
with the tongues of men and of angels”; it was wrong
and somehow wicked; but it caught you, it had caught
Alma and all these people; and in a sense he despised them
all, and was talking to something else; the thing he knew;
the secret that made him so strong, even with his weak
voice and weak mouth; strong and fascinating. It was
wrong to be here; it would be wrong to come again; but
there was nothing like it anywhere else; no other such
group of things; and thought and knowledge of things.
More must be heard. It would be impossible not to risk
everything to hear more.
</p>
<p>
Alma ordered fresh tea; Mr. Wilson and the husband
and the two new men were standing about. The elder
man was describing in a large shouting voice a new mantelpiece—a
Tudor mantelpiece. What was a Tudor mantelpiece?
... to buy a <i>house</i> to put round it. What a clever
idea.... Little Mr. Wilson seemed to be listening; he
squealed amendments of the jests between the big man’s
boomings ... buy a <i>town</i> to put round it.... What a
lovely idea ... buy a <span class="sc">nation</span> to put round it ... there
was a burst of guffaws. Mr. Wilson’s face was crimson;
his eyes appeared to be full of tears. The big man went
on. Mrs. Binkley kept uttering deep reedy caressing laughs.
Two of the young men were leaning forward talking eagerly
with bent heads. Miriam’s neighbour sat upright with
his hands on his knees, his eyes glaring as if ... as if he
were just going to jump out of his skin. Hidden by the
increased stir made by the re-entry of the maid, and
encouraged by the extraordinary clamour of hilarious voices
Miriam ventured to ask him if he would perform an act of
charity by allowing her to rob him of one of his cigarettes.
She liked her unrecognisable voice. It was pitched deep,
but strong; a little like Mrs. Binkley’s. The young man
started and turned eagerly towards her, stammering and
muttering and fumbling about his person. “I swear” he
brought out, “I could cut my throat ... my <i>God</i> ...
oh here we are.” Seizing the open box from the tea-table
he swung round with his crossed legs extended across her
corner so that she was cut off from the rest of the room,
and held the box eagerly towards her. They both took
cigarettes and he lit them with matches obtained from his
neighbour. “Thank you” said Miriam blissfully drawing
“that has saved my life.” Precipitately restoring the
matches he swung round again leaning forward with his
elbow on his knee, blocking out Miriam’s view. Before it
was blocked out she had caught the eye of Mr. Wilson
who was standing facing her in the little group of men about
the tea-table and still interpolating their hubbub with
husky squeals of jocularity, quietly observing the drama
in her corner. For the moment she did not wish to listen;
Alma’s appreciative squeals were getting strained and the
big man was a bore. Seen sitting in profile taking his tea
he reminded her of Mr. Staple-Craven; her eye caught
and recoiled from weak patches, touches of frowsy softness
here and there about the shaggy head. Cut off from the
room safe in the extraordinary preoccupation of the young
man whose eager brooding was moving now towards some
imminent communication—she had undisturbed knowledge
of what she had done. Speech and action had launched
her, for good or ill, into the strange tide running in this
house. Its cold waters beat against her breast. She was no
longer quite herself. There was something in it that
quickened all her faculties, challenged all the strength she
possessed. By speech and action she had accepted something
she neither liked, nor approved nor understood;
refusal would have left its secret unplumbed, standing
aside in her life, tormenting it. The sense of the secret
intoxicated her ... perhaps I am selling my soul to the
devil. But she was glad that Mr. Wilson had witnessed her
launching.
</p>
<p>
“You are magnificent” gasped the young man glaring
at the wall. “I mean you are simply magnificent.” He
flashed unconscious eyes at her—<i>he</i> had no consciousness of
the cold tide with its curious touch of evil; it was hand
in hand with him and his simplicity that she had stepped
down into the water—and hurried on. “An angel of
dreams. Dreams ... you know—I say,” he spluttered
incoherently, “I <i>must</i> tell you.” His working preoccupied
face turned to face hers with a jerk that brought part of the
heavy sheaf of hair across one of his eyes. “I’ve been doing
the best work this week I ever did in my life!” Red flooded
the whole of his face and the far-away glare of his one
visible eye became a blaze of light, near, and smiling a
guilty delighted smile. He was demanding <i>her</i> approval,
<i>her</i> sympathy, just on the strength of her being there.
It was the moment of consenting to Alma that had brought
this. However it had come she would have been unable
to withstand it. He wanted approval and sympathy;
someone here had some time or other shut him up; perhaps
he was considered second-rate, perhaps he was second-rate;
but he was innocent as no one else in the room was innocent.
“<i>Oh</i>, I <i>am</i> glad” she replied swiftly. Putting his cigarette
on the edge of the piano he seized one of her hands and
crushed it between his own. His face perspired and there
were tears in his eye. “<i>Do</i> tell me about it” she said with
bold uneasy eagerness hoping he would drop her hand
when he spoke. “It’s a play” he shouted in a low whisper,
a spray of saliva springing through his lips “a play—it’s the
finest stuff I ever rout.” Were all these people either
cockney or with that very bland anglican cultured way of
speaking—like the husband and the man with the Tudor
mantelpiece?
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">7</h3>
<p>
“I can of course admit that the growth of corn was, at
first, accidental and unconscious, and that even after the
succession of processes began to be grasped and the soil
methodically cultivated the success of the crop was supposed
to depend upon the propitiation of a <i>god</i>. I can see
that the discovery of the possibility of growing <i>food</i> would
enormously alter the savage’s conception of God, by introducing
a new set of attributes into his <i>consciousness</i> of him;
but in defining the God of the Christians as a <i>corn</i> deity
you and Allen are putting the cart before the horse.”
</p>
<p>
That was it, that was it—that was right somehow; there
was something in this big red-faced man that was not in
Mr. Wilson; but why did his talk sound so lame and dull,
even while he was saving God—and Mr. Wilson’s, while
he made God from the beginning a nothing created by the
fears and needs of man, so thrilling and convincing, so
painting the world anew? He was wrong about everything
and yet while he talked everything changed in spite of yourself.
</p>
<p>
The earlier part of the afternoon looked a bright happy
world behind the desolation of this conflict; the husband
and wife and the young men and Mrs. Binkley and the
bright afternoon light, dear far-off friends ... withstanding
in their absence the chilly light of Mr. Wilson’s
talk. Who was Mr. Wilson? But he was so certain that
men had created God ... life in that thought was a nightmare.
Nothing that could happen could make it anything
but a nightmare henceforth ... it did not matter what
happened, and yet he seemed pleased, amused about everything
and eager to go on and “do” things and get things
done.... His belief about life was worse than agnosticism.
There was no doubt in it. “Mr. G” was an invention of
man. There was nothing but man; man, coming from the
ape, some men a little cleverer than others, men had discovered
science, science was the only enlightenment, science
would put everything right; scientific imagination,
scientific invention. Man. Women were there, cleverly
devised by nature to ensnare man for a moment and produce
more men; to bring scientific order out of primeval
chaos; chaos was decreasing order increasing; there was
nothing worth considering before the coming of science;
the business of the writer was imagination, not romantic
imagination, but realism, fine realism, the truth about
“the savage” about all the past and present, the avoidance
of cliché ... what was cliché?...
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
“Well my dear man you’ve got the Duke of Argyll to
keep you company” sighed Mr. Wilson with a smothered
giggle, getting to his feet.
</p>
<p>
Miriam went from the sitting room she had entered in
another age with the bedroom violets pinned against her
collarette, stripped and cold and hungry into the cold of
the brightly-lit little dining room. The gay cold dishes,
the bright jellies and fruits, the brown nuts, the pretty
Italian wine in thin white long-necked decanters ...
Chianti ... Chianti ... they all seemed familiar with
the wine and the word; perhaps it was a familiar wine
at the Wilson supper-parties; they spoke of it sitting at
the little feast amongst the sternness of nothing but small
drawings and engravings on walls that shone some clear
light tone against the few pieces of unfamiliar grey-brown
furniture like people clustering round a fire. But it was a
feast of death; terrible because of their not knowing that
it was a feast of death. The wife of the cockatoo had come
in early enough to hear nearly the whole of the conversation
and had sat listening to it with a quiet fresh talkative
face under her fresh dark hair; the large deep furrow
between her eyebrows was nothing to do with anything
here, it was permanent, belonging to her life. She had
brought her life in with her and kept it there, the freshness
and the furrow; she seemed now, at supper to be out
for the evening, to enjoy herself—at the Wilsons’ ...
coming to the Wilsons’ ... for a jolly evening, just as
anybody would go anywhere for a jolly evening. She did
not know what was there, what it all meant. Perhaps
because of the two little boys. She, with two little unseen
boys and the big house so near, big and full of her and
noise and things, and her freshness and the furrow of her
thought about it prevented anything from going on; the
dreadful thing had to be dropped where it was, leaving the
big man who had fought to pretend to be interested and
amused, leaving Mr. Wilson with the last word and his
quiet smothered giggle.
</p>
<p>
Alma tried to answer Mrs. Pinner’s loud fresh talking
in the way things had been answered earlier in the afternoon
before the departure of all the other people. Everything
she said was an attempt to beat things up. Every
time she spoke Miriam was conscious of something in the
room that would be there with them all if only Alma would
leave off being funny; something there was in life that
Alma had never yet known, something that belonged to an
atmosphere she would call “dull.” Mr. Wilson knew that
something ... had it in him somewhere, but feared it and
kept it out by trying to be bigger, by trying to be the biggest
thing there was. Alma went on and on, sometimes uncomfortably
failing, her thin voice sounding out like a corkscrew
in a cork without any bottle behind it, now and
again provoking a response which made things worse
because it brought to the table the shamed sense of trying
to keep something going.... The clever excitements would
not come back. Mrs. Binkley would have helped her....
Miriam sat helpless and miserable between her admiration
of Alma’s efforts and her longing for the thing Alma kept
out. Her discomfiture at Alma’s resentment of her dulness
and Alma’s longing for Mrs. Binkley was made endurable
by her anger over Alma’s obstructiveness. Mr. Pinner and
the big man were busily feeding. Mrs. Pinner laughed
and now and again tried to imitate Alma; as if she had
learned how it was done by many visits to the Wilsons’,
and then forgot and talked in her own way, forgetting to
try to say good things. Alma grew smaller as supper went
on and Mr. and Mrs. Pinner larger and larger. Together
they were too strong in their sense of some other life and
some other way of looking at things to give the Wilson
way a clear field. Mr. Wilson began monologues in favourable
intervals, but they tailed off for lack of nourishing
response. Miriam listened eagerly and suspiciously; lost
in admiration and a silent, mentally wordless opposition.
She felt the big man was on her side and that the Pinners
would be if they could understand. They only saw the
jokes ... the—the, higher facetiousness ... good phrase,
that was the Chianti. And they were getting used to that;
perhaps they were secretly a little tired of it.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">8</h3>
<p>
After supper Mr. Pinner sang very neatly in a small clear
tenor voice an English translation of Es war ein König im
Thule. Miriam longed for the German words; Mr. Pinner
cancelled even the small remainder of the German sentiment
by his pronunciation of the English rendering; “there
was a king of old tame” he declared and so on throughout
the song. Alma followed with a morsel of Chopin. The
performance drove Miriam into a rage. Mr. Pinner had
murdered his German ballad innocently, his little Oxford
voice and his false vowels did not conceal the pleasure he
took in singing his unimagined little song, Alma played her
piece at her audience, every line of her face and body proclaiming
it fine music, the right sort of music, and deprecating
all the compositions that were not “music.” It was
clear that her taste had become cultivated, that she <i>knew</i>
now, that the scales had fallen from her eyes as they had
fallen from Miriam’s eyes in Germany; but the result
sent Miriam back with a rush to cheap music, sentimental
“obvious” music, shapely waltzes, the demoralising
chromatics of Gounod, the demoralising descriptive passion
pieces of Chaminade, those things by Liszt whom somebody
had called a charlatan who wrote to make your blood
leap and your feet dance and made your blood leap and
your feet dance ... why not?...
</p>
<p>
Her mind went on amazed at the rushing together of
her ideas on music, at the amount of certainty she had
accumulated. Any of these things she declared to herself
played, really <i>played</i>, would be better than Alma’s Chopin.
The Wilsons had discovered “good” music, as so many
English people had, but they were all wrong about music;
nearly all English people were. Only in England would
either the song or the solo have been possible. The song
was innocent, the solo was an insult. The player’s air of
superiority to other music was insufferable; her way of
playing out bar by bar of the rain on the roof as if she were
giving a lesson was a piece of intellectual snobbery. Chopin
she had never met, never felt or glimpsed. Chopin was a
shape, an endless delicate stern rhythm as stern as anything
in music; all he was came through that, could come only
through it and she played tricks with the shape, falsified
all the values, outdid the worst trickery of the music she
was deprecating. At the end of the performance which
was applauded with a subdued reverence, Miriam eased
her agony by humming the opening phase of the motive
again and again in her brain and very nearly aloud, it was
such a perfect rhythmic drop. For long she was haunted
and tortured by Alma’s horrible holding back of the third
note for emphasis where there was no emphasis ... it was
like ... finding a <i>wart</i> at the dropping end of a fine tendril,
she was telling herself furiously while she fended off Alma’s
cajoling efforts to make her join in a game of cards. She
felt too angry and too suffering—what <i>was</i> this wrong
thing about music in all English people—even if she had
not been too shy to exhibit her large hands and her stupidity
at cards. So they were going to play cards, actually cards.
The room felt cold to her in her long suppressed anger and
misery. She began to wish the Pinners would go. Sitting
by the fire shivering and torpid she listened to Mrs. Pinner’s
outcries and the elaboration between the rounds of jests
that she felt were weekly jests. Sitting there dully listening
she began to have a sort of insight into the way these jests
were made, it was a thing that could be cultivated. Her
tired brain experimented. Certain things she heard she
knew she would remember; she felt she would repeat
them—with an air of originality. They would seem very
brilliant in any of her circles—though the girls did that
sort of thing rather well; but in a less “refined” way;
that was true! This was the sort of thing the girls did;
only their way was not half so clever ... if she did, everyone
would wonder what was the matter with her; and she
would not be able to keep it up, without a great deal of
practice; and it would keep out something else ... but
perhaps for some people there was something in it; it was
their way. It had always been Alma’s way a little. Only
now she did it better. Perhaps ... it was like Chopin’s
shape.... They do not know how angry I have been ...
they are quite amiable. I am simply horrid ... wanting
Alma to know I know she’s wrong quite as much as I care
for Chopin; perhaps more ... no; if <i>anybody</i> had <i>played</i>,
I should be happy; perfectly happy ... what does that
mean ... because real musicians are not at all nice people
... “a queer soft lot.” But why are the English so awful
about music? They are poets. Why are they not musicians?
I hope I shall never hear Alma play Beethoven. As long as
she plays Chopin like that I shall never like her.... Perhaps
English people ought never to play, only to listen to music.
They are not innocent enough to play. They cannot
forget themselves.
</p>
<p>
At ten o’clock they trooped into the kitchen. Miriam,
half asleep and starving for food, eagerly ate large biscuits
too hungry to care much for Alma’s continued resentment
of her failure to join the card party and her unconcealed
contempt of her sudden return to animation at the prospect
of nourishment. She had never felt so hungry.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">9</h3>
<p>
Going at last to her room Miriam found its gleaming
freshness warm and firelit. Warm fresh deeps of softly
coloured room that were complete before she came in with
her candle. She stood a moment imagining the emptiness.
The April night air was streaming gently in from meadows.
Going across to the window she hesitated near the flowered
curtain. It stirred gently; but not in that way as if moved
by ghostly fingers. The meadows here were different.
They might grow the same again. But woods and meadows
were always there, away from London. One could go to
them. They were going on all the time. All the time in
London spring and summer and autumn were passing unseen.
But this was not the time. They were <i>different</i> here. She
pulled a deep wicker chair close up to the exciting white
ash-sprinkled hearth. The evening she had left in the
flames downstairs was going on up here. To-morrow,
to-day, in a few hours she would be sitting with them
again, facing flames; no one else there. She sat with
her eyes on the flames. A clock struck two.... I’ve got
to them at last, the people I ought to be with. The books
in the corner showed their bindings and opened their pages
here and there. They made a little sick patch on her heart.
They approved of them. Other people approved of things.
Nothing had been done yet that anybody could approve
of ... the <i>some</i>thing village of Grandpré ... und dann
sagte darauf, die gute vernünftige Hausfrau.... It all
floated in the air. They would see it if somebody showed
it. They would be angry and amused if anybody tried
to show it. It was wrong in some way to try and show the
things you were looking at. Keep quiet about them.
Then somebody else expressed them; and those other
people turned to you and demanded your admiration—and
wondered why you were furious. It’s too long to wait,
until the things come up of themselves. You <i>must</i> attend
to them....
</p>
<p>
How the fragrance of the cigarette stood out upon the
fresh warm air ... that was perique, that curious strong
flavour. They were very strong, he had said so; but
downstairs, talking like that they had had no particular
flavour, just cigarettes, bringing the cigarette mood ...
no wonder he had been surprised, really surprised, at her
smoking so many ... but then he had been surprised at
her eating a hard apple at midnight ... the sitting room
had suddenly looked familiar going into it alone while
they were seeing out the Pinners and the big man. Strange
unknown voices that perhaps she would not hear again,
going out into the night ... their voices jesting the last
jests as the guests went down the garden, sounding in the
hall, familiar and homely, well known to her, presently
coming back into the sitting room; the fire burning brightly
like any other fire, the exciting deep pinkness of the shaded
lamplight like nothing else in the world. Alma knew it,
rushing in ... whirling about with Alma in that room
with that afternoon left in it; the sounds of bolting and
locking coming in from the hall.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">10</h3>
<p>
... “You looked extraordinarily pretty....”
</p>
<p>
“You have come through it all remarkably well” ...
remarkable had a k in it in English, and German, merkwürdig,
and perhaps in Scandinavian languages; but not
in other languages; it was one of the things that separated
England from the south ... remarkable ... hard and
chilly.
</p>
<p>
“You know you’re awfully good stuff. You’ve had an
extraordinary variety of experience; you’ve got your
freedom; you ought to write.”
</p>
<p>
“That is what a palmist told me at Newlands. It was
at a big afternoon ‘at home’; there was a palmist in a
little dark room sitting near a lamp; she looked at nothing
but your hands; she kept saying whatever you do, write.
If you haven’t written yet, write, if you don’t succeed go
on writing.”
</p>
<p>
“Just so, have you written?”
</p>
<p>
“Ah, but she also told me my self-confidence had been
broken; that I used to be self-confident and was so no
longer. It’s true.”
</p>
<p>
“Have you written anything?”
</p>
<p>
“I once sent in a thing to Home Notes. They sent it
back but asked me to write something else and suggested
a few things.”
</p>
<p>
“If they had taken your stuff you would have gone on
and learnt to turn out stuff bad enough for Home Notes
and gone on doing it for the rest of your life.”
</p>
<p>
“But then an artist, a woman who had a studio in Bond
Street and knew Leighton, saw some things I had tried
to paint and said I ought to make any sacrifice to learn
painting, and a musician said the same about music.”
</p>
<p>
“You could work in writing quite well with your present
work.”
</p>
<p>
... “Pieces of short prose; anything; a description
of an old woman sitting in an omnibus ... anything.
There’s plenty of room for good work. There’s the
Academy always ready to consider well-written pieces of
short prose. Write something and send it to me.”
</p>
<p>
Nearing London shivering and exhausted she recalled
Sunday morning and the strangeness of it being just as it
had promised to be. Happy waking with a clear refreshed
brain in a tired drowsy body, like the feeling after a dance;
making the next morning part of the dance, your mind
full of pictures and thoughts and the evening coming up
again and again, one great clear picture in the foreground
of your mind. The <i>evening</i> in the room as you sat propped
on your pillows drinking the clear pale curiously refreshing
tea left by the maid on a little wooden tray by your bedside;
its fragrance drew you to sip at once, without adding
milk and sugar. It was delicious; it steamed aromatically
up your nostrils and went straight to your brain; potent
without being bitter. Perhaps it was “China” tea; it
must be. The two biscuits on the little plate disappeared
rapidly, and she poured in milk and added much sugar
to her remaining tea to appease her hunger. The evening
stayed during her deliberately perfunctory toilet; she
wanted only to be down. It began again unbroken with
the first cigarette after breakfast, when a nimble remark
thrown out from the excited gravity of her happiness made
Mr. Wilson laugh. She was learning how to do it. It
stayed on through the day, adding the day to itself in a
chain, a morning of talk, a visit to Mr. Wilson’s study—the
curious glimpses of pinewood from the windows; pinewood
looking strange and far-away—there were people
in Weybridge to whom those woods were real woods where
they walked and perhaps had the thoughts that woods
bring; here they were like woods in a picture book; not
real, just a curious painted background for Mr. Wilson’s
talk ... all those books in fifty years’ time burnt up by the
air; he did not seem to think it an awful idea ... you can
do anything with English ... and then the names of
authors who had done some of these things with English
... making it sing and dance and march, making it like
granite or like film and foam. Other languages were more
simple and single in texture; less flexible.... Gazing
out at the exciting silent pines—so dark and still, waiting,
not knowing about the wonders of English—Miriam
recalled her impressions of those of the authors she knew.
It was true that those were their effects and the great
differences between them. How did he come to know all
about it and to put it into words? Did the authors know
when they did it? She passionately hoped not. If they
did, it was a trick and spoilt books. Rows and rows of
“fine” books; nothing but men sitting in studies doing
something cleverly, being very important, “men of letters”;
and looking out for approbation. If writing meant that,
it was not worth doing. English a great flexible language;
more than any other in the world. But German was the
same? Only the inflections filled the sentences up with
bits. English was flexible and beautiful. Funny.
Foreigners did not think so. Many English people thought
foreign literature the best. Perhaps Mr. Wilson did not
know much foreign literature. But he wanted to; or he
would not have those translations of Ibsen and Björnsen.
German poetry marched and sang and did all sorts of things.
Anyhow it was wonderful about English—but if books
were written like that, sitting down and doing it cleverly
and knowing just what you were doing and just how somebody
else had done it, there was something wrong, some
mannish cleverness that was only half right. To write
books, knowing all about style would be to become like a
man. Women who wrote books and learned these things
would be absurd and would make men absurd. There was
something wrong. It was in all those books upstairs. “Good
stuff” was wrong, a clever trick, not worth doing. And
yet everybody seemed to want to write.
</p>
<p>
The rest of the day—secret and wonderful. Sitting about,
taken for one of the Wilson kind of people, someone who
was writing or going to write, by the two Scotch professors;
sitting about listening to their quiet easy eager unconcerned
talk, seeing them “all round” as Mr. Wilson saw them,
the limits of professorship and teaching, the silly net and
trick of examinations, their simplicity and their helplessness;
playing the lovely accompaniment like quiet waves,
of Schubert’s Ave Maria, the sudden, jolly, sentimental
voice of Professor Ewings, his nice attentions ... if it
had been Wimpole Street or anywhere in society he would
not have seen me....
</p>
<p>
It would be wrong to try and write just because Mr.
Wilson had said one ought.... The reasons he had given
for writing were the wrong ones ... but it would be
impossible to go down again without doing some writing....
Impossible not to go down again.... They knew
one was “different”; and liked it and thought it a good
thing; a sort of distinction. No one had thought that
before. It made them a home and a refuge. The only
refuge there was except being by oneself ... only their
kind of difference was not the same. They thought nearly
everyone “futile” and “dull”—everyone who did not see
things in their way was that. Presently they would find
that one was not different in the same way. He had spoken
of people who grow “dull” as you get to know them.
Awful ... perhaps already, he meant——
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
“It’s all very well ... people read Matthew Arnold’s
simple profundities; er—simple profundities; and learn
his little trick; and go <i>about</i>—hcna, hcna,—arm in arm
with this swell ... hcna ... <i>puffing</i> with illumination.
All about <i>nothing</i>. It’s all, my dear Miss Henderson,
about absolutely nothing.”
</p>
<p class="tb">
 
</p>
<p class="noindent">
The train stopped. Better not to go down again. There
was something all wrong in it. Wrong about everything.
The Pinners and the big man were right ... but there
was something dreadful in them, the something that is in
all simple right sort of people, who just go on, never thinking
about anything. Were they good and right? It did
not enter their heads to think that they were wrong in
associating with him.... Here in London it seemed wrong
... she hurried wearily with aching head up the long
platform. The Wimpole Street people would certainly
think it wrong; if they knew about the marriage. They
knew he was a coming great man; the great new “critic”;
a new kind of critic ... they knew everybody was beginning
to talk about him. But if they knew they would not
approve. They would never understand his way of seeing
things. Impossible to convey anything to them of what
the visit had been.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">11</h3>
<p>
The hall clock said half-past nine. The hall and the
large rooms had shrunk. Everything looked shabby and
homely. The house was perfectly quiet. Passing quietly
and quickly into her room she found the table empty.
The door into the den was shut and no sound came from
behind it. No one but James had seen her. The holiday
was still there. Perhaps there would be time to take hold
in the new way before anyone discovered her and made
demands. Perhaps they were all three wanting her at this
moment. But the house was so still, there was nothing
urgent. Perhaps she would never feel nervous at Wimpole
Street again. It was really all so easy. There was nothing
she could not manage if only she could get a fair start and
get everything in order and up to date. Her mind tried
to encircle the book-keeping. There must be a plan for it
all; so much work on the accounts to keep the whole
ledger-full sent out to date, so much on the address books,
and so much on the monthly cash books—a little of all
these things every day in addition to the day’s work, whatever
happened; that would do it. Then there would
be no muddle and nothing to worry about and perhaps time
to write. They must be told that she would use any spare
time there was on other things.... They would be quite
ready for that provided the books were always up to date
and the surgeries always in order. That is what a Wilson
would have done from the first.
</p>
<h3 class="subchapter">12</h3>
<p>
“Mr. Grove to see you, miss.”
</p>
<p>
“Mr. <i>Grove</i>?”
</p>
<p>
“Yes miss; a dark gentleman.”
</p>
<p>
Miriam rose from her chair. James had gone after a
moment of sympathetic waiting, back down the basement
stairs to her dinner. Miriam felt herself very tall and
slender—set apart and surrounded; healed of all fighting
and effort. She went quickly through the hall thinking
of nothing; herself, walking down Harriett’s garden path.
At the door of the waiting-room she hesitated. Mr. Grove
was the other side of the door, waiting for her to come in.
She opened the door with a flourish and advanced with
stiffly outstretched hand. Before she said “teeth?” in a
cheerful breezy professional tone that exploded into the
past and scattered it she saw the pained anxiousness of his
face and the flush that had risen under his dark skin.
</p>
<p>
“No” he said recoiling swiftly from his limp handshake
and sitting abruptly down on the chair from which he had
risen. Miriam watched him go helplessly on to say in stiff
resentfulness what he had come to say while she stood
apologetically at his chair side.
</p>
<p>
“I meant to write to you—two or three times.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh why didn’t you?” she responded emphatically....
Why can’t I be quiet and hear what he has to say? He
must have wanted to see me dreadfully to come here like this.
</p>
<p>
His eyes were fixed blindly upon the far-off window.
</p>
<p>
“Yes. I wanted to very much. How do you like your
life here?” He was flushing again. His skin still had that
shiny film over it, so unlike the clear snaky brilliance of the
eyes. They were dreadful and all the rest flappy and
floppy and somehow feverish.
</p>
<p>
“Oh—I like it immensely.”
</p>
<p>
“That is a very good thing.”
</p>
<p>
“Do you like your life?”
</p>
<p>
He drew in his lower lip on an indrawn breath and held
it with his teeth. His eyes were thinking busily under a
slight frown.
</p>
<p>
“That is one of the things I wished to discuss with you.”
</p>
<p>
“Oh <i>do</i> discuss it with me,” cried Miriam.
</p>
<p>
“I am very glad you are getting on here so well” he
murmured thoughtfully, gazing through the window, to
and fro as if scanning the opposite house-fronts.
</p>
<p>
“Oh, I like it immensely” said Miriam after a silence.
Her head was beginning to ache. He sat quite still, scanning
to and fro, his lip recaptured under his teeth.
</p>
<p>
“They are such nice people. I like it for so many things.”
</p>
<p>
He looked absently round at her.
</p>
<p>
“M-yes. On several occasions I thought of writing to
you.”
</p>
<p>
“Yes” said Miriam sitting down opposite to him.
</p>
<p>
He shifted a little in his chair to keep his way clear to
the window.
</p>
<p>
For a few moments they sat silent; then he suddenly
took out his watch and stood up.
</p>
<p>
Miriam rose. “Have you seen the Ducaynes lately?”
she asked hurriedly, moving nervously towards the door.
Murmuring an indistinct response he led the way to the
door and held it open for her.
</p>
<p>
James was coming forward with a patient. They stood
aside for the patient to pass in, James waiting to escort Mr.
Grove to the front door. They shook hands limply and
silently. Miriam stood watching his narrow loosely knit
clerical back as he plunged along through the hall and out.
She turned as James turned from the door.... What
it must have cost him to break in here and ask for me
... how silly and how rude I was.... I <i>can’t</i> believe he’s
been; it’s like a dream. He’s seen me in the new life
changed ... and I’m not really changed.
</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
